>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 15:
DONALD TRUMP CLOSES IN ON THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION, UNCONTESTED, WHILE
HILLARY CLINTON BATTLES BERNIE
SANDERS IN KENTUCKY.
THE PERSISTENT GUN VIOLENCE IN
CHICAGO AND HOW IT IS CHANGING
THE CITY'S DEMOGRAPHICS BY
CAUSING MIDDLE CLASS "BLACK
FLIGHT."
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
THE MAYORS OF EUROPE WHOSE JOB
IS TO KEEP NIGHTLIFE HUMMING AND
PEACEFUL.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM WTTW IN CHICAGO, HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY SEASON
IS NEARING ITS END WITH ONLY
NINE STATES LEFT TO VOTE.
ON TUESDAY, OREGON HOLDS
PRIMARIES FOR BOTH REPUBLICANS
AND DEMOCRATS, WHILE DEMOCRATS
HOLD A PRIMARY IN KENTUCKY.
THAT'S WHERE FORMER SECRETARY OF
STATE HILLARY CLINTON WAS
CAMPAIGNING TODAY, SPEAKING TO
SUPPORTERS IN LOUISVILLE AND
FORT MITCHELL.
VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS,
WHO BEAT CLINTON IN WEST
VIRGINIA AND INDIANA THIS MONTH
AND VOWS TO COMPETE ALL THE WAY
TO THE NATIONAL CONVENTION, ALSO
CAMPAIGNED IN KENTUCKY THIS
WEEKEND.
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP, NOW
ONLY 103 DELEGATES SHORT OF THE
1,237 NEEDED TO LOCK UP THE
REPUBLICAN NOMINATION, IS
DEFYING THE STANDARD PRACTICE OF
CANDIDATES RELEASING PERSONAL
TAX RETURNS.
TODAY, REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN REINCE
PRIEBUS SAID TRUMP'S TAX RETURNS
MAY NOT MATTER, BECAUSE HE
OFFERS SUCH A MASSIVE CHANGE TO
WASHINGTON.
>> IT'S GOING TO BE UP THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE, THEY'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO DECIDE WHETHER THAT'S
A BIG ISSUE OR NOT.
>> >> Reporter: FORMER HOUSE
SPEAKER NEWT GINGRICH SAID TODAY
HE WOULD CONSIDER AN OFFER BY
TRUMP TO BE HIS RUNNING MATE.
>> IF HE ASKS ME I'D CERTAINLY
SAY I WANT TO SIT DOWN AND TALK
ABOUT IT, I DON'T THINK IT'S AN
AUTOMATIC YES.
I THINK WE'D BE HARD PRESSED NOT
TO SAY YES.
>> Sreenivasan: SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY WAS IN SAUDI
ARABIA TODAY FOR TALKS WITH KING
SALMAN ABOUT THE CONFLICTS IN
SYRIA, LIBYA, AND YEMEN.
A SAUDI-LED, U.S.-BACKED
COALITION IS SUPPORTING YEMEN'S
GOVERNMENT IN ITS CONFLICT
AGAINST SHIITE REBELS ALLIED
WITH FORCES LOYAL TO THE
COUNTRY'S FORMER PRESIDENT.
AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA AND ISIS MILITANTS ARE
ALSO FIGHTING FOR TERRITORY.
TODAY, ISIS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR A SUICIDE
BOMBING THAT KILLED 25 RECRUITS
AT A GOVERNMENT POLICE STATION
IN THE SOUTHERN PART OF YEMEN.
EGYPT HAS SENTENCED 152 PEOPLE
TO PRISON THIS WEEKEND FOR
PARTICIPATING IN PEACEFUL ANTI-
GOVERNMENT PROTESTS.
ABOUT A THIRD WERE CONVICTED AND
SENTENCED IN ABSENTIA.
THE PROTESTERS HAD DEMONSTRATED
ON THE STREETS OF CAIRO LAST
MONTH, AGAINST EGYPT'S TRANSFER
OF TWO RED SEA ISLANDS TO SAUDI
ARABIA.
EGYPTIAN STATE MEDIA SAID THE
PROTESTERS HAD VIOLATED A LAW
BANNING PROTESTS WITHOUT FIRST
NOTIFYING EGYPT'S INTERIOR
MINISTRY.
THE SENTENCES ARE SEEN AS A
FURTHER CRACKDOWN ON POLITICAL
DISSENT BY EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT
ABDEL FATTAH AL-SISI.
A NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
BOARD GO TEAM ARRIVED TODAY AT
THE SCENE OF A CHARTER BUS CRASH
THAT KILLED EIGHT PEOPLE NEAR
LAREDO, TEXAS, YESTERDAY.
THE PASSENGERS WERE HEADED TO A
CASINO NEAR THE MEXICAN BORDER,
WHEN THE DRIVER APPARENTLY LOST
CONTROL OF THE BUS, AND THE BUS
FLIPPED ON ITS SIDE.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES SAID THE OTHER
43 PASSENGERS AND THE DRIVER
WERE TAKEN TO NEARBY HOSPITALS
FOR INJURIES.
COULD SELF-DRIVING CARS ACTUALLY
MAKE TRAFFIC CONDITIONS WORSE?
READ THE STORY ON OUR WEBSITE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: CHICAGO IS THE
NATION'S THIRD MOST POPULOUS
CITY, WITH A POPULATION THAT'S
ROUGHLY ONE-THIRD WHITE, ONE-
THIRD BLACK, AND ONE-THIRD
HISPANIC.
BUT CHICAGO ALSO HAS THE
UNENVIABLE DISTINCTION OF BEING
AMERICA'S MURDER CAPITAL: IT HAD
THE MOST HOMICIDES OF ANY
AMERICAN CITY LAST YEAR, WITH
489.
WITH FIVE MEN AND ONE WOMAN
FOUND SHOT TO DEATH YESTERDAY
AND ANOTHER WOMAN FATALLY
STABBED, THE CITY HAS RECORDED
MORE THAN 220 HOMICIDES THIS
YEAR AND IS ON TRACK TO SURPASS
LAST YEAR'S NUMBER.
AS IN RECENT YEARS, MOST VICTIMS
OF GUN VIOLENCE ARE BLACK.
CORRESPONDENT BRANDIS FRIEDMAN,
FROM CHICAGO'S PBS STATION WTTW,
REPORTS, THE HIGH MURDER RATE
HAS SPARKED A GRADUAL EXODUS OF
THE CITY'S BLACK MIDDLE CLASS.
>> HIT ME!
>> Reporter: IT'S GAME TIME AT
THE TRAVIS HOUSEHOLD.
>> OOOHH, CHEATERS NEVER WIN.
>> Reporter: KYLE AND CARLA
TRAVIS MOVED WITH THEIR TWO
CHILDREN FROM CHICAGO TO THE
SUBURB OF MATTESON THREE YEARS
AGO.
THEY'VE BEEN IN THIS HOUSE FOR A
YEAR.
>> LOVE THE NEIGHBORHOOD, PLENTY
OF KIDS.
NOT TOO FAR FROM THE SCHOOL THAT
THEY GO TO.
>> IN MATTESON, IT'S A DIFFERENT
SENSE OF COMMUNITY TO ME.
DEFINITELY ONE WHERE YOU SEE A
SENSE OF FREEDOM WITH STUDENTS
AND THE KIDS AND WHOMEVER TO
COME GO AS THEY PLEASE.
YOU NEED TO BE ON A HEIGHTENED
SENSE OF AWARENESS, SO TO SPEAK,
IN THE CITY.
>> Reporter: THAT HEIGHTENED
AWARENESS BECAME OUTRIGHT FEAR
AFTER THE VIOLENCE HIT HOME IN
THEIR OLD NEIGHBORHOOD OF
BRONZEVILLE, A CENTER OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CULTURE IN
CHICAGO.
IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, KYLE WAS
DRIVING HOME FROM THE GROCERY
STORE, WAITING AT A RED LIGHT,
WHEN HE HEARD GUNSHOTS.
>> THE BULLET CAME THROUGH THE
PASSENGER SIDE WINDOW, STRUCK ME
ON THIS SIDE OF ARM, EXITED HERE
IF I WOULD'VE MAYBE JUST TAKEN
FOOT OFF BRAKE FOR A SPLIT
SECOND, IT COULD'VE POSSIBLY
STRUCK ME IN THE CHEEK OR THE
HEAD OR WHATEVER MAY HAVE YOU, I
MEAN, WHO KNOWS?
>> Reporter: KYLE WAS ABLE TO
DRIVE HIMSELF TO A NEARBY
HOSPITAL, WHERE HE WAS TREATED
AND SENT HOME WITH BANDAGED ARM.
THE COUPLE'S DECISION TO LEAVE
THE CITY WAS ACCELERATED BY
THEIR CONCERN FOR FIVE-YEAR OLD
CHASE AND SEVEN-YEAR OLD
EMERSON.
THE TRAVIS FAMILY IS PART OF A
TREND HERE IN CHICAGO.
ON AVERAGE, MORE THAN 10,000
AFRICAN-AMERICANS LEAVE THE CITY
EVERY YEAR, AND DATA SHOWS AN
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF BLACKS
LIVING IN THE SUBURBS.
RESEARCHERS ARE BEGINNING TO
CALL THIS MIGRATION "BLACK
FLIGHT."
FROM 2000 AND 2014, JUST OVER
200,000 AFRICAN-AMERICANS LEFT
CHICAGO, THAT'S ROUGHLY ONE OUT
OF EVERY FIVE BLACKS.
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT
CHICAGO URBAN PLANNING PROFESSOR
JANET SMITH SAYS GUN VIOLENCE IS
A KEY FACTOR IN THE MIGRATION,
ESPECIALLY FOR FAMILIES WITH
CHILDREN.
>> WHEN WE MAP OVER POPULATION
LOSS AND LOOK AT WHERE CRIME IS,
AND WE LOOK AT THE FACT THAT
THAT POPULATION LOSS HAS A LOT
OF CHILDREN, YOU SEE A
RELATIONSHIP.
WE'RE SEEING FAMILIES FIRST MORE
SO THAN HOUSEHOLDS, YOU KNOW,
SINGLE PEOPLE OR TWO-PERSON
HOUSEHOLDS WITH NO KIDS.
>> Reporter: THE CITY'S VIOLENCE
TURNED TIERRA WINSTON INTO A
SUBURBANITE.
SHE AND HER 14-YEAR OLD SON,
TYRIEK, WERE CONSTANTLY WORRIED
ABOUT THEIR SAFETY IN THEIR OLD
NEIGHBORHOOD, ROSELAND, ONE OF
THE CITY'S MOST ECONOMICALLY
DEPRESSED.
>> THERE'S LOT OF GANG VIOLENCE,
LOT OF DRUG TRAFFICKING.
SOMETIMES I WOULD BE VERY LEERY
ABOUT HIM RIDING A BIKE, GOING
OUTSIDE.
I'D HAVE TO KEEP THE WINDOWS
OPEN SO I CAN KIND OF KEEP AN
EYE ON HIM.
>> Reporter: AT HOME ONE SCHOOL
NIGHT, TWO YEARS AGO, THEY TOO
HAD A CLOSE CALL.
>> I HEARD GUNSHOTS, COMING,
LIKE RUNNING, RUNNING PAST MY
WINDOW.
SO, I WENT TO MY MOM'S ROOM
BECAUSE SHE WAS ASLEEP, AND I
WOKE HER UP.
AND I TOLD HER I HEARD GUNSHOTS
THROUGH MY WINDOW, AND THEN I
HEARD PEOPLE RUNNING.
I WAS, LIKE, PRETTY SCARED.
>> Reporter: NO BULLETS ENTERED
THEIR APARTMENT, AND TYRIEK WAS
NOT HURT.
BUT FOR TIERRA, THAT WAS ENOUGH.
SHE DECIDED TO MOVE TO THE
SUBURB OF DOLTON.
>> AS SOON AS I WALKED IN, I WAS
LIKE: THIS IS IT!
THIS IS MY HOUSE.
>> Reporter: NOW TYRIEK
PRACTICES HIS JUMP SHOT WITHOUT
THE FEAR OF GUNSHOTS.
>> IT'S BEEN DIFFERENT.
I LOVE MY HOUSE, LOVE THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Reporter: THE NEIGHBORHOODS
THE WINSTON AND THE TRAVIS
FAMILIES HAVE LEFT BEHIND NOW
GRAPPLE WITH A DWINDLING
POPULATION.
CHICAGO URBAN LEAGUE PRESIDENT
SHARI RUNNER SAYS MIDDLE CLASS
BLACK FLIGHT IS HURTING THE
CITY'S TAX BASE.
>> SO, IF YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT
BEING A PLANNER, A CITY PLANNER,
YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT
ANTICIPATING REVENUE FROM TAXES
FROM PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND WORK IN
THE CITY.
ALL OF THOSE ASSUMPTIONS HAVE TO
BE RE-LOOKED AT, AND HOW DOES
THAT IMPACT CITY AS A WHOLE IN
TERMS OF HOW IS IT GOING TO MAKE
THAT UP AND PROVIDE THE
RESOURCES IT NEEDS AS A CITY TO
PROVIDE FOR CITIZENS.
>> Reporter: RUNNER SAYS THE
CITY NEEDS TO INVEST MORE IN
BETTER HOUSING IN THESE
COMMUNITIES AND IN THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN THEM.
>> WE HAVE PROGRAM CALLED
OPPORTUNITY WORKS THAT
SPECIFICALLY TARGETS 16-TO-24-
YEAR-OLDS TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEY'RE JOB READY, THAT THEY
HAVE ACCESS TO JOBS SO THEY CAN
BEGIN TO BE CONTRIBUTING PARTS
OF OUR COMMUNITY AND WILL STAY
AWAY FROM THOSE OTHER KINDS OF
ACTIVITIES THAT WILL PUT THEM AT
RISK FOR BEING INVOLVED IN THE
JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: THOUGH LEAVING
CHICAGO WAS A TOUGH DECISION FOR
THE TRAVISES, KYLE AND CARLA
HAVEN'T LOOKED BACK.
>> YOU CAN'T HELP ANYONE ELSE,
WHETHER IT BE THROUGH CIVIC
ENGAGEMENT, SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY, ETCETERA.
IF YOU'RE NOT AT PEACE AT HOME.
WHAT'S MOST IMPORTANT FOR US IS
PROTECTING THE FAMILY NUCLEUS.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ON"
BLACK FLIGHT" AND THE IMPACT OF
CHICAGO'S GUN VIOLENCE, I AM
JOINED HERE AT WTTW BY "USA
TODAY" REPORTER AAMER MADHANI.
>> SO WHAT IS THE IMPACT, THE
RIPPLE EFFECT ON THE COMMUNITY
WHEN YOU LOSE 181,000 BLACK
RESIDENTS IN THIS SPAN OF TEN
YEARS?
>> IT IS ENORMOUS.
YOU ARE LOOKING AT A CITY THAT
IS ALREADY GOING THROUGH THIS
FINANCIAL SITUATION.
WE HAVE ABOUT $20 BILLION
UNDERFUNDED PENSION SYSTEM.
WE HAVE A CREDIT RATING THAT IS
ABYSMAL.
WE CAN'T AFFORD TO LOSE MORE
PEOPLE AND WE CAN'T AFFORD TO
LOSE PEOPLE LIKE THE FOLKS YOU
ARE TALKING TO THAT HAVE THE
MEANS TO LEAVE CHICAGO.
THESE ARE MIDDLE CLASS, WORKING
CLASS PEOPLE WITH SKILLS AND
EDUCATION.
THOSE ARE TAXPAYERS, YOU KNOW,
IT IS NOT JUST ABOUT -- I THINK
IT IS OFTEN WHEN WE LOOK AT
VIOLENCE IN PLACES LIKE CHICAGO,
IT IS CHICAGO FOLKS TO TALK
ABOUT, BUT WHAT IS HAPPENING TO
THESE FAMILIES JUST AS MUCH
AFFECTS ME WHEN THEY LEAVE AS IT
DOES THOSE AFRICAN-AMERICANS
COMMUNITIES.
>> PUT THIS IN KIND OF A
NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE.
I MEAN, IT HAS BEEN CALLED
ALMOST A REVERSE MIGRATION OF
AFRICAN-AMERICANS BACK TO
DIFFERENT SOUTHERN CITIES WHERE
MAYBE THERE SEEMS TO BE
OPPORTUNITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> RIGHT.
SO YOU LOOK AT THE BIGGEST 0
POPULATION, DECLINE SINCE 2000,
AND DETROIT, CHICAGO, NEW YORK
WHERE IT HAS BEEN GREATEST, WHAT
IS DIFFERENT ABOUT DETROIT AND
CHICAGO COMPARED TO NEW YORK,
NEW YORK HAS A LOT OF -- YOU
HAVE SEEN VIOLENCE NOSE DIVE A
BIT, BUT IN CHICAGO THERE IS
THIS DARK CLOUD THAT COMES WITH
THIS HUGE FLIGHT THAT IS GOING
ON, AND, YOU KNOW, YOU LOOK AT
WHO IS AFFECTED BY VIOLENCE AND
YOU LOOK AT 500 PLUS MURDERS
THIS YEAR, WE ARE ON PACE FOR
THAT, THE VAST MAJORITY OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE KILLED HAVE TIED
-- HAVE TIES, BUT THEN YOU LOOK
AT SOME OF THE FOLKS YOU JUST
TALKED TO, YOU KNOW, HOW CAN YOU
NOT LEAVE IF YOU GOT SHOT IN THE
ARM AND YOU HAVE A FIVE-YEAR OLD
AND SEVEN-YEAR-OLD, THAT IS A
PERSON'S NEIGHBOR, I WOULD THINK
ABOUT LEAVING.
>> RIGHT.
AND THE ECONOMISTS SAY IT IS
MOST RATIONAL DECISION TO
PROTECT YOUR FAMILY OR PROTECT
YOUR LIFE.
I MEAN, THERE SEEMS TO BE A
TENSION HERE ON THE ONE HAND, WE
WANT TO SUPPORT THE IDEA OF THE
AMERICAN DREAM AND SOMETIMES TO
DO THAT, THEY ARE ESCAPING A
NIGHTMARE.
>> ONE IS JUST OPPORTUNITY,.
>> RIGHT SOME OF THIS MIGRATION
HAS BEEN GOING ON SINCE THE
SEVENTIES.
THERE IS INDUSTRIALIZATION OF
THE STEEL MILLS, AND THERE ARE
STILL OPPORTUNITIES, AND EARLIER
THIS MONTH, HERE IN TOWN, SOUTH
SIDE, THAT HAS A BIG
AFRICAN-AMERICAN AND LATINO
POPULATION THAT DONALD TRUMP AND
HILLARY CLINTON AND BERNIE
SANDERS HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT,
THEY JUST LAID OFF 600 PEOPLE.
WHY WOULD YOU STAY IN IN SOME OF
THESE NEIGHBORHOODS AROUND IF
YOUR JOB ISN'T THERE?
IF YOU OR I JOB WAS LOST WE
WOULD GO TO WHERE THE NEXT I
DON'T KNOW IS.
>> IS THERE A PLAN, I KNOW THE
CITY SAID HERE IS AN OPPORTUNITY
PROGRAM BUT HOW DO YOU GET AN
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF UNEMPLOYED
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THESE
COMMUNITIES AN OPPORTUNITY TO DO
SOMETHING AND THEN ACTUALLY KEEP
THEM THERE?
>> IT IS A GIGANTIC PROBLEM.
IT IS NOT UNIQUE TO CHICAGO.
THERE HAS BEEN SOME PUSH FROM
THE PRIVATE SECTOR, HOWARD
SCHULTZ FROM STARBUCKS HAS MADE
THIS SORT OF THE PRIME PROJECT,
IT IS ABOUT SAVING A GENERATION.
BUT THERE AREN'T ANY SORT OF
QUICK ANSWERS TO THIS.
THE CITY TRIES HARD TO GETTING
TEENAGERS AND YOUNG ADULTS INTO
SUMMER PROGRAMS, WHETHER WORKING
FOR THE CITY OR PRIVATE
ENTERPRISES, BUT WHEN YOU TALK
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, NEXT TO HALF OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN BETWEEN 20
AND 24 THAT ARE NEITHER IN
SCHOOL OR EMPLOYED, AND THE CITY
THE SIZE OF CHICAGO THAT IS
ENORMOUS, THAT'S AN ENORMOUS
PROBLEM.
>> THIS IS LIKE WHAT IS
HAPPENING OVERSEAS IN WAR TORN
LANDS.
>> IT IS NOT DISSIMILAR TO WHAT
I REMEMBER SEEING IN IRAQ POST
2003 AND WHEN THEY DISBANDED THE
ARMY, DISBANDED THE IRAQI ARMY
AND YOU BASICALLY PUT HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF MILITARY TRAINED
YOUNG MEN WITHOUT JOBS OUT ON
THE STREET, YOU HAVE TO TURN TO
SOMETHING.
YOU HAVE TO MAKE MONEY AND PUT
FOOD ON THE TABLE.
>> AAMER MADHANI, USA REPORTERS,
THANKS FOR COMING.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: CITIES COPE WITH
ALL KINDS OF QUALITY OF LIFE
ISSUES: COMMUTING AND TRAFFIC,
CRIME AND POLICING, POLLUTION
AND OVERCROWDING, NOISE AND
NIGHTLIFE.
THE DUTCH HAVE PIONEERED HAVING
SPECIAL MAYORS TO MIND THE
NIGHT, AND THE MODEL IS GAINING
NOTICE ACROSS EUROPE.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, CO-REPORTED
WITH "CITYLAB," THE SISTER SITE
TO "THE ATLANTIC" DEVOTED TO
CITIES OF THE FUTURE AND THE
PEOPLE WHO SHAPE THEM.
THIS SEGMENT IS ALSO PART OF OUR
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SERIES "URBAN
IDEAS," WHICH LOOKS AT
INNOVATIVE IDEAS FOR GOVERNING
AND SOLVING PROBLEMS IN CITIES
AROUND THE WORLD.
CITYLAB CONTRIBUTING WRITER
FEARGUS O'SULLIVAN HAS THE STORY
FROM AMSTERDAM.
>> Reporter: THE DUTCH CAPITAL
OF AMSTERDAM IS FAMOUS FOR
SCENIC CANALS, BICYCLE-FILLED
STREETS, AND MUSEUMS OF OLD
MASTER PAINTINGS.
AMSTERDAM IS ALSO KNOWN FOR ITS"
ANYTHING GOES" ATTITUDE, WITH
MARIJUANA SMOKED IN COFFEE SHOPS
AND ITS RED LIGHT DISTRICT WHERE
PROSTITUTION IS LEGAL.
SINCE 2003, AMSTERDAM HAS HAD A
PUBLIC OFFICIAL DEDICATED TO
MAKING THE CITY THRIVE AFTER
DARK.
MIRIK MILAN IS AMSTERDAM'S
"NACHTBURGEMEESTER," WHICH
MEANS "NIGHT MAYOR."
>> THE NIGHT IS ALWAYS TREATED
DIFFERENTLY THAN THE DAY.
WHERE YOU HAVE A PROBLEM AT
NIGHT, THE FIRST REACTION OF
CITY OFFICIALS OR THE MAYOR
WOULD BE, "OH WE HAVE TO STOP
THIS," INSTEAD OF BRINGING ALL
THE STAKEHOLDERS TOGETHER AND
FINDING A SOLUTION.
SO OUR FUNCTION IS TO BRIDGE THE
GAP BETWEEN ALL THE SIDES.
>> Reporter: WHILE NIGHT MAYOR
MIRIK MILAN DOESN'T WIELD ANY
OFFICIAL POWER, HIS JOB IS TO
ACT AS A LIAISON BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT, RESIDENTS, AND
NIGHTLIFE CULTURE.
MILAN IS ELECTED BY A
COMBINATION OF INTERNET VOTES,
AND A PANEL MADE UP OF NIGHTLIFE
BUSINESS OWNERS.
TOGETHER, BUSINESS OWNERS AND
THE CITY COMBINE TO PAY THE
NIGHT MAYOR'S SALARY.
ARE THERE ANY MISCONCEPTIONS OR
STEREOTYPES ABOUT NIGHTLIFE THAT
YOU FEEL YOU HAVE TO DISPEL?
>> YEAH.
OH, OF COURSE.
YEAH.
LOTS.
>> Reporter: WHAT SORTS OF
THINGS?
>> OH, NIGHTLIFE IS HEAVY
DRINKING, PUKING ON THE STREET,
TROUBLE.
THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE SAY.
INSTEAD OF THINKING, OH,
NIGHTLIFE MAKES THE CITY A NICE
PLACE TO LIVE IN, CREATES AN
AREA IN WHICH PEOPLE CAN EXPRESS
THEMSELVES, AND TO CONNECT WITH
OTHER PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: IN A CITY THAT
HOSTS MORE THAN FIVE MILLION
TOURISTS A YEAR, BALANCING THE
NEEDS OF A THRIVING NIGHT TIME
ECONOMY AND THE NEEDS OF THE
CITY'S SLEEPING RESIDENTS IS NO
EASY TASK.
WE'RE IN REMBRANDTPLEIN, IN
CENTRAL AMSTERDAM.
IT'S ONE OF THE BUSIEST AREAS IN
THE WHOLE CITY FOR NIGHTLIFE.
THE THING IS THAT THINGS CAN GET
A LITTLE BIT ROWDY AROUND HERE,
AND THAT'S WHY THE MAYOR OF
AMSTERDAM AND THE NIGHT MAYOR OF
AMSTERDAM GOT TOGETHER TO HIRE
HOSTS FOR THIS SQUARE TO MAKE
SURE THAT THINGS RUN JUST A
LITTLE BIT MORE SMOOTHLY.
20 "SQUARE HOSTS" PATROL THIS
SQUARE ON WEEKENDS FROM 11:00
P.M. TO 5:00 A.M., MAKING SURE
PEOPLE FOLLOW THE RULES: NO
BIKING AFTER 11:00 P.M., "STAY
CLASSY," AND IF NATURE CALLS,"
USE A LOO."
LORRAINE KOORNDIJK IS A PATROL
LEADER.
>> WE HELP PEOPLE WHEN THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR PLACES TO GO, OR
TRANSPORTATION.
WE HELP PEOPLE WHEN THEY'RE
FEELING SICK.
THEN WE TRY, WHEN THEY GET INTO
ARGUMENTS, WE TRY TO CALM THEM
DOWN.
AND AFTER THEY'RE DONE PARTYING,
WE TRY TO GET THEM HOME.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER EXAMPLE:
WHEN THE BARS AND CLUBS ARE
MANDATED TO CLOSE AROUND 4:00
A.M., MASSES OF PARTYGOERS FLOOD
OUT INTO THE STREETS AT THE SAME
TIME.
NIGHT MAYOR MIRIK MILAN'S
COUNTERINTUITIVE SOLUTION?
A PLAN TO ALLOW SOME CLUBS TO
STAY OPEN ALL NIGHT.
>> IF THE PEOPLE CAN JUST LEAVE
WHENEVER THEY WANT, YOU HAVE
REALLY A LOT LESS PRESSURE ON
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Reporter: RADION, INSIDE THIS
FORMER DENTISTRY SCHOOL, IS ONE
OF TEN AMSTERDAM CLUBS LICENSED
TO STAY OPEN 24 HOURS A DAY.
OWNER STAAS LUCASSEN SAYS ONE
KEY ADVANTAGE IS THAT IT'S
LOCATED IN THE LESS POPULATED
OUTSKIRTS OF THE CITY.
>> ARE YOU NOT GOING TO MAKE TOO
MUCH NOISE OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD?
IS IT OUTSIDE OF THE CITY
CENTER?
>> Reporter: ANOTHER FACTOR
HELPING IT GAIN A 24 HOUR
LICENSE IS THAT RADION IS NOT
JUST A NIGHTCLUB. AFTER PARTYING
ENDS AT 7:00 A.M., AN AREA OF
THE CLUB TRANSFORMS INTO A
PLAYROOM FOR NEIGHBORHOOD KIDS.
>> I THINK THAT'S REALLY LIKE A
MODERN DAY NIGHTCLUB.
SO THE PEOPLE THAT LIVE AROUND
IT SHOULD ALSO BENEFIT FROM THE
FACT THAT THE NIGHTCLUB IS
THERE.
>> Reporter: THE ACTUAL MAYOR OF
AMSTERDAM, EBERHARD VAN DER LAAN
MEETS SEVERAL TIMES A YEAR WITH
NIGHT MAYOR MILAN AND CREDITS
HIM WITH HELPING TO KEEP THE
PEACE.
>> HE IS THE CONNECTION BETWEEN
THOSE THAT GO OUT IN THE NIGHT,
AND THOSE THAT SLEEP IN THE
NIGHT AND WORK DURING THE DAY.
HE'S A KIND OF MEDIATOR.
HE GIVES IDEAS, HE HELPS TO
MODERATE THE DIALOGUE.
HE BRINGS IN EXPERTS.
HE GIVES GOOD WARNINGS WHEN YOU
NEED HIM IN SPECIFIC SITUATIONS.
HE'S ALWAYS THERE.
>> WELCOME, WELCOME TO THE FIRST
EVER NIGHT MAYOR SUMMIT.
>> Reporter: AND JUST LAST
MONTH, AMSTERDAM HOSTED THE
FIRST INTERNATIONAL NIGHT MAYOR
SUMMIT, BRINGING TOGETHER
ACTIVISTS, RESEARCHERS, CLUB
OWNERS, AND NIGHT MAYORS FROM
ALL OVER THE WORLD.
PARTICIPANTS DISCUSSED TOPICS
LIKE BOOSTING INFRASTRUCTURE
AROUND TRANSPORTATION, THE ROLE
OF NIGHTLIFE IN MARKETING A
CITY, AND HOW TO ACCOMMODATE FOR
DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES IN CITIES
DUE TO GENTRIFICATION.
ONE OF THE PEOPLE ATTENDING THE
SUMMIT WAS ISABELLE VON
WALTERSKIRCHEN.
SHE'S THE PRESIDENT OF ZURICH,
SWITZERLAND'S "NIGHT CITY
COUNCIL," WHICH WAS STARTED JUST
LAST YEAR.
IT HAS A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT
APPROACH COMPARED TO AMSTERDAM:
MADE UP OF ALL VOLUNTEERS, IT
HAS NO OFFICIAL CONNECTION WITH
THE CITY.
DO YOU THINK THERE'S AN
ADVANTAGE TO BEING INDEPENDENT
IN THAT WAY?
>> THE BIG ADVANTAGE IS THAT
WE'RE NOT REPRESENTING A BRANCH,
SO WE DON'T HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF
NEEDS OF ANY STAKEHOLDER, BUT WE
CAN TAKE CARE OF THE WHOLE
CONSTRUCT OF NIGHTLIFE.
>> Reporter: IN FRANCE, PARIS
AND TOULOUSE ARE AMONG THE
LATEST TO INSTALL NIGHT MAYORS,
AND LONDON IS CONSIDERING
CREATING A "NIGHTTIME CHAMPION"
POSITION.
BUT THE CONCEPT REMAINS
PREDOMINANTLY DUTCH.
AT LEAST 10 CITIES IN THE
NETHERLANDS HAVE NIGHT MAYORS,
INCLUDING HERE, IN THE NORTHERN
CITY OF GRONINGEN KNOWN FOR ITS
LIVE MUSIC VENUES.
NIGHT MAYOR CHRIS GARRIT HAS HAD
TO DEAL WITH MANY ISSUES,
INCLUDING NOISE.
>> I THINK A GOOD NIGHT MAYOR
WATCHES THESE TWO FACTS: PEOPLE
CAN SLEEP WELL AND PEOPLE CAN
PARTY HARD.
>> Reporter: GARRIT TOOK ME
AROUND HIS CITY OF 200,000
PEOPLE ONE SUNDAY EVENING.
FIRST STOP WAS A PUBLIC ARTS
CENTER WHERE MORE THAN 1,000
PEOPLE HAD COME OUT FOR A
CONCERT.
GRONINGEN HAS NO RULES ABOUT
CLOSING TIMES, WHICH MAKES THE
CITY A MAGNET FOR REVELERS
ACROSS THE NETHERLANDS.
THE NEXT STOP, A LOCAL BAND WAS
PLAYING AT A BAR ACROSS TOWN.
EVEN IN THE SMALL CITY OF
GRONINGEN, A BIG PART OF THE
NIGHT MAYOR'S JOB IS BEING A
MEDIATOR BETWEEN CLUBS AND
NEIGHBORS WHO MAY HAVE ISSUES
WITH THE SOUND.
AFTER MORE THAN FOUR YEARS,
GARRIT IS STEPPING DOWN AS NIGHT
MAYOR THIS MONTH, BUT STILL
BELIEVES IT'S A CRUCIAL ROLE.
>> I THINK IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW
BIG THE CITY IS.
THE CULTURE ALWAYS NEEDS A VOICE
TO SAY SOMETHING.
BECAUSE THERE'S ALWAYS MORE
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOING ON.
IF NOBODY STANDS UP, THEN THE
CULTURAL CLIMATE CAN BE GOING
DOWN.
>> Reporter: IN AMSTERDAM, NIGHT
MAYOR MIRIK MILAN SAYS NIGHT
MAYORS HELP CITIES PROMOTE THE
ECONOMIC VALUE OF NIGHTLIFE.
>> WHAT PEOPLE REALLY OFTEN
FORGET, IS WHEN THERE'S LOT OF
PEOPLE DANCING, THERE'S A LOT
PEOPLE WORKING.
>> Reporter: AMSTERDAM HAS A BIG
NIGHTLIFE INDUSTRY.
IT HAS A LOT OF TOURISTS.
IT HAS A SOFT DRUG SCENE.
IT HAS A SEX INDUSTRY THAT'S
QUITE ACTIVE.
A CRITIC MIGHT SAY THAT THE
NIGHT MAYOR'S ROLE IS JUST ABOUT
MAKING VICE EASIER TO ACCESS FOR
PARTIERS AND TOURISTS.
IS THAT ALL THERE IS TO IT?
>> WHEN WE SEE THE NIGHT TIME
ECONOMY, WE SEE IT AS A PLACE
WHERE A LOT OF DEVELOPMENT IS
HAPPENING FOR THE CREATIVE
INDUSTRY.
THINK OF ALL THE PHOTOGRAPHERS,
FILMMAKERS.
OF COURSE, D.J.s, AND LIVE
MUSICIANS.
THEY HAVE A PLATFORM IN WHICH
THEY CAN DEVELOP THEIR TALENT.
SO THAT'S THE VALUE THAT I SEE
IN NIGHTLIFE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: UKRAINE IS
CELEBRATING ITS VICTORY IN THE
POPULAR, ANNUAL EUROVISION SONG
CONTEST.
UKRAINIAN SINGER AMALA WON THE
TOP PRIZE WITH HER SONG "1944,"
ABOUT THE WORLD WAR II
DEPORTATION OF 200,000 MUSLIM
TATARS FROM CRIMEA TO THE SOVIET
UNION.
MANY UKRAINIANS DIED EN ROUTE OR
IN EXILE, AND SURVIVORS WERE
ALLOWED TO RETURN TO CRIMEA ONLY
IN THE 1980'S.
JAMALA, HERSELF A TATAR, SAID
HER GREAT GRANDMOTHER WAS AMONG
THOSE ORDERED DEPORTED BY SOVIET
DICTATOR JOSEF STALIN.
RUSSIA ANNEXED CRIMEA FROM
UKRAINE TWO YEARS AGO, BUT
JAMALA DENIED HER SONG HAD
POLITICAL OVERTONES AND REFERRED
ONLY TO THE EVENTS OF 1944.
WHAT WOULD YOU PAY FOR A LOCK OF
A FOUNDING FATHER'S HAIR?
AN ANONYMOUS BIDDER PAID ALMOST
$7,000 FOR 14 STRANDS OF THOMAS
JEFFERSON'S HAIR YESTERDAY AT
HERITAGE AUCTIONS IN DALLAS.
JEFFERSON'S DOCTOR SNIPPED THE
LOCK AFTER THE THIRD PRESIDENT
AND MAIN AUTHOR OF THE
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE DIED
IN 1826.
IF YOU'RE COUNTING, THAT'S
ROUGHLY $500 A STRAND.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAYS THE WORLD
IS BECOMING MORE INTERCONNECTED
AND BUILDING WALLS WON'T CHANGE
THAT.
SPEAKING AT RUTGERS UNIVERSITY
GRADUATION IN NEW JERSEY TODAY,
THE PRESIDENT, WITHOUT NAMING
DONALD TRUMP, LAMBASTED TRUMP'S
IDEA OF A WALL ALONG THE U.S.-
MEXICO BORDER.
>> SUGGESTING WE CAN BUILD AN
ENDLESS WALL ALONG OUR BORDERS
AND BLAME OUR CHALLENGES ON
IMMIGRANTS CONTRADICTS THE
EVIDENCE THAT OUR GROWTH AND OUR
INNOVATION AND OUR DYNAMISM HAS
ALWAYS BEEN SPURRED BY OUR
ABILITY TO ATTRACT STRIVERS FROM
AROUND THE GLOBE.
THAT'S HOW WE BECAME AMERICA.
WHY WOULD WE WANT TO STOP IT
NOW?
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
MAKES HIS FINAL COMMENCEMENT
SPEECH AT THE U.S. AIR FORCE
ACADEMY IN COLORADO NEXT MONTH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY, ON
MONDAY'S NEWSHOUR, SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM BRABANT
REPORTS ON THE ONGOING STRUGGLE
BETWEEN RADICAL AND MODERATE
ISLAM IN BOSNIA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, WITH A
SPECIAL THANK YOU TO OUR
COLLEAGUES HERE AT WTTW IN
CHICAGO.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.